#Balban (1266-86):
Balban’s theory of kingship had two main objectives: first, to enhance the prestige of the crown through elaborate court rituals.
Second, the restoration of law and order and had to choose between ‘consolidation’ and ‘expansion’ as the guiding principle of his administrative policy. He preferred consolidation.


Balban strictly followed the policy of racial segregation.
Barani gives two examples which conformed to this attitude of balban: 1. he refused the proposal to appoint Kamal Mahiyar to the post of khwaja (accountant) for the iqta of Amroha as he was the son of a hindu convert; 2. balban refused to allow Fakhr Bawni to his court as he was only the chief of merchants (malik-ut-tajjar).


He introduced changes in the military organization of the DS.
He ordered the separation of the military dept (diwan-i-wizarat), and the formed was placed under a minister for military affairs (diwan-i-ariz).
He derived the basic elements of his theory of kingship from Sassanid Persia, where kingship had been raised to the highest possible level.


Balban claimed his descent from the Iranian hero, Afrasiyab.
He impressed upon the people that kingship was vice-regency of god on earth (niyabat-i-khudai).
The king was the shadow of the god (zil-i-ilahi).
He introduced the two un-islamic systems of sizda (prostration) and paibos (kissing the feet of the ruler).
He was first Indian ruler to introduce the celebration of the Persian new year Nao-roz in india.
Balban, before coming to the throne, had been an active member of the Turkish nobility (Chalisa or Turkan-i-chihalgani) and knew its real strength and its sense of loyality to the family of iltutmish.
His army had to face a military test when in 1275 Tugril, the governor of Bengal, rebelled against balban.
After the failure of two successive expeditions against Tugril, balban himself had to marched to Lakhnauti, the capital of medieval Bengal.
Harsh measures adopted by balban to deal with rebels and to maintain law and order. He adopted the policy of
‘blood and iron’.


He placed the overall charge of the frontier in the hands of his son and heir-apparent Muhammad, who was killed in one of his skirmishes against the Mongols.
Muhammad was a great fighter and also a patron of arts and scholar.
The likes of amir khusrau and amir hasan were under Muhammad’s employment.
Muhammad death was a smashing blow to balban and the death-knell of his dynasty.
Within a year of Muhammad’s death, balban died, and within four years of balban’s death, the ilbari dynasty alsoended.
Balban, on his death-bed in 1287, made Kaikhusrau, late prince Mahummud’s son, his successor.
