#Alauddin’s

#administrative measures:
The measures for the prevention of rebellions:
Three successive rebellions – those of Akat Khan of malik umar and mangu khan, and of haji or sidi maula.
All religious endowments and grants of lands (waaf and inam) by the state were revoked.
Elaborate system of espionage was organsied.
The sale and use of liquor and intoxicans was completely prohibited in delhi.
Restrictions and strong checks were put on social gatherings, including parties; marriages between the families of the nobles etc.


#Revenue reforms:
His first revenue regulation (zabita) related to the measurement of cultivable land as the principle for determining and revenue; biswa (1/20th of a bigha) was declared to be the standard unit of measurement.
The state demand was fixed as half of the produce per biswa and assessment was done on the basis of paimash (measurement).
Bhaga (land-revenue), bhoga (cesses) and kar (taxes)
Sultan deprived khuts, maqaddams and chaudhuris who were forced to pay the land revenue. Barani calls them balahar. Kuts were a set of intermediates who rose at the parganah od shiq (dist) level. Amir khusrau, for the first time, referred to them as zamindars.
House tax (ghari) and pasture tax (chari) were also imposed on the agrarian population.
Khalisa (crown lands); in the khalisa lands the revenue was collected directly by the state.
To ensure the full realization of dues or arrears from the collectors, alauddin khilji established a new dept called the diwan-i-mustakharaj.
The booty captured during war was called ghanima, of which the state was to receive 1/5th being distributed among the soldiers.


#Military reforms:
A2 firishta there were 475,000 cavalrymen in his army.
A2 Ziauddin barani, the annual salary of a trained armed soldier with one horse was 243 tankas and with two horses 321 tankas. The soldiers were paid in cash. He was the first among the DS to introduce dagh (branding of horses) and chehra (maintain the descriptive roll of each soldier). He started a strictprice control mechanism which came to be known as the market reform system.


#Market control or economic regulations:
A2 Barani the basic objective of these reforms was to maintain a large and efficient army for keeping the Mongols in check.
A2 amir khusrau, sultan introduced these reforms for “the general welfare of the people”.
Barani informs that the cultivators could retain only 10 man of grain.
Four separate markets were established: central grain market, market for manufactured goods, market for general merchandise and market for horses, cattle and slaves.
Each market was put under the charge of a shuhna or controller of market. The sultan received daily reports for the market from three independent sources – shuhna, barids (intelligent officers) and munshis (secret spies).
Very strict punishments, were prescribed for cheating and under-weighing.
shehna-i-mandi was appointed to keep a strict virgil.
Permit officers – parwana rais.
Sarai-i-adl was the market for clothes which was set up near the royal palace at badayun gate.
Horse trade was the monopoly of the afghans and mutanis.
Ferishta, writing in the reign of Jahangir (1607), remarks: “to the end of alauddin’s reign these prices remained steady and there was no change in them owing to lack of rain or other causes”.
Malik kafur, to whom he had given the exalted title of malik naib (regent).
